Hello and welcome back to the course of
R programming. I hope you had a chance to
practice what we talked about last time
and specifically basic operations in a
data frame and today we're talking
about filtering data frames.
Alright, let's get started I'm going to
copy this and create a new section in
R code and this one we will call
filtering data frames. Alright, in the
previous section, we mostly talked about
working with columns right? Except for at
the very start where we talked about the
square brackets but then we were mostly
working with columns, column multiply column,
create column then recycling of vectors
for columns or into columns and then
also deleting columns. But filtering is
actually more about rows right? So like
if you think about it in excel terms
right? You've got a table and you want to
look at only specific rows then you
switch the filters on the columns are
still in place but some rows are hidden,
some rose become visible or you want to
you know to switch off, like to
delete some rows, so that's also
filtering and so on. So working with rows,
how do we do it in R? Well the first
thing that I'm going to show you is a
pretty cool feature or a cool approach
is let's say I want to look at stats so
let's start with head stats. This is
getting a very used becoming a very used
function head stats because we're using
it every tutorial. I'm sure you'll remember
it after this section, so head stats and
let's say we want to look at internet
users. Let's say we want to look at
internet users and so we would say stats.
Dollar sign internet users right? So that's
that column. Now let's say we want to find
out which internet users or which
countries have less than two internet
users less than 2% of people using
internet. We would say stats internet users
remember this vector and then we're
comparing it with the number 2 and what
that will give us is it will compare
every single value in this vector with
the number two so let's run that
you'll see that we've got this vector
of false, false, false and a true here false,
false, false, false, false and so on and so
on there's another true, there's another
true so every time it comes across the
value that's less than 2, it'll put a
true, otherwise it will be false.
Ok so in return we've got a vector and
what can we do with this vector now?
Well we can put this vector into an
object and let's call that object filter.
If we run this, now we've got an object
filter which looks exactly like that.
What can we do with this filter? Well
what we can do is we can go to stats and
then in square brackets and this is the
cool features I was talking about. In stats, you
can say in the rows, you know how we
use say one to ten right or one to a
hundred and we want to see the first
hundred rows.
Well now what we're going to do is
instead of saying one to hundred, we're going to say
filter and that will pass this important
part that we have to understand that
stats will take a vector which is
exactly the same length as the data
frame but this vector is a true-false
vector. So every time that it will come across
the true, it will display that role
every time it comes across the false, it
won't display the row. So if you run that, you'll see
that we've got only selected rows and
they all do indeed have less than two
internet users so these countries they
don't have internet is not that
widespread and therefore only a couple
like one around one percentage of the
population actually uses the internet
there or has access to the internet and
how did we get that? Once again, we have a
vector with true false values and this
data frame the way we're calling it or
the way we're accessing it every time it
comes across the true value it will
display that row, every time it across
comes across a false value it won't
display that row.
Ok that's filtering, so that's a very
neat feature to remember and use and now
we're going to actually not just use it,
we're going to abuse it.
So let's start doing that, stats and now
what we're going to do is let's say we
want to look at countries with
birth rate over 40, remember we looked
in the STR from from the STR function,
we know that it's never over 50 but
let's look at the country with over 40,
how would we do that? Well we would use
similar approach but this time we're not
even going to create the filter we're
going to just take this right and we're
going to put a comma and we're going to
instead of doing this intermediary step
we'll just put it right in here and now
we'll just change condition greater than
40 and not internet users we want a
different column. What's the column that we want,
birth right birth right there we go.
So if I run this now, I will get all the
countries that have a birth rate over 40
that means per thousand people, 40 people at
least 40 people are born every year.
Well basically that those countries
their population is growing very quickly,
there we go, that was that easy and that
is thanks to the new approach that we
learned that not always you have to just
pass the numbers that you want to
display the row numbers but
you can actually supply a true/false
vector and it will tell you the data
frame will return the rows that are
associated with the true values in your
vector.
Alright, so now what we're going to do is
we're going to make this condition even
more interesting. We're going to say,
where countries with birth rate over 40
but now out of these we want to like to
only the countries with internet users
under two. So we will add the and and
remember it's a single and unlike some
other programming languages, stats dollar
sign and then internet users less than
two right? So now these both of these
conditions have to be true for the road
to show up, if we run that now we've got
just three rows 1,2,3 countries, all of
them have birth rate over 40 and
internet users under two. Awesome,
what else can we do? Well let's filter
by categorical variable, one of these
let's look at income group. Well actually
we only have one proper categorical
variable these are just the country
names and so on. So let's filter by
income group and now we will say stats
dollar sign income group equals so
double equals let's remember that, and
let's say we want to look at all the
high-income countries and don't forget
the comma comma nothing.
Alright, let's run
that. Okay see I made a mistake. I made a
mistake in my code, that's why I got an
empty result so high income, no incomes.
If we run that, there we go so we can see
all the countries with high income you
can see on the right they're all they're
all high income.
Ok that's good and so we know about
factors, we've already talked about
factors if you want to check a different
one then you can always use levels right
and stats income group to find out what
the factors are. If you want to try out a
different one and then you can try lower
middle-income just out of curiosity and
or just to experiment and the other
thing that I wanted to do is I wanted to
give you an exercise, so it's kind of like
a brain teaser and will solve it right
away here as well. So try finding can you
find out all of the information from
this data frame about Malta? So Malta is a
country, try find this information, so use
what you've learned here. It's going to be a
bit different you might you need to make
a little change and can you find please
the information from Malta, so pause this
video and give it a go and in 321
we're going to solve it together. Alright,
so the way to solve it is
stats and then here you want to filter
by country name right? Country name
equals Malta common nothing, if I run that,
I get that one row where country name
equals Malta. So they have a
birthright of 9.5 introduces 68.9 then
there in the high income group. There we
go, that's how you filter data frames, I
hope this information was useful and
hopefully not too complicated.
There is actually nothing complicated
about it. It's just we introduced a new
concept where you can pause a vector of
true/false values into your data
frame to find the correct values. I know
like here it looks a bit complicated, you
you're calling a data frame and then
you're calling it again but when you
think of it in these terms,
that first creating the vector and then
you're passing it into the data frame.
It's all pretty simple but this is a
very powerful approach and you will be
using it a lot in R, so it was good
that we covered it off and now we're
going to move
on to the next tutorial. I look forward
to seeing you there and until next time,
happy coding.